clive.martin: George.
George Williams: How are you?
clive.martin: I'm okay, I'm okay. … I just, …
clive.martin: I will start off with, I'm sorry if you felt I didn't, didn't, reply and such. I think…
clive.martin: … I looked it up, … I had a, …
clive.martin: What's the word I'm looking for?
clive.martin: I had a fall on holiday in, in, … In… where was I?
clive.martin: I was in Portugal.
clive.martin: And, … Bash, bash my head.
clive.martin: And everyone thought, you know, I was… I was dying, and my heart was going on something, or blah blah blah, that sort of stuff.
clive.martin: They wouldn't let me fly.
clive.martin: And, so I stepped down in hospital.
clive.martin: And anyway, I came back, and then I went to see the specialist, and, had to do all these tests.
clive.martin: And, … Which is quite interesting. Obviously, …
clive.martin: Then came back after all the tests, and the guy said, you had your best results you've had the last 4 years.
George Williams: Ugh.
clive.martin: So you're no longer diabetic too, you're, …
clive.martin: what's he called? I call all those other things, they test.
George Williams: Pretty diabetic.
clive.martin: So I'm below pre-diabetic now, so that's interesting.
clive.martin: And my blood pressure had gone down quite a lot, and my cholesterol which was…
clive.martin: I think it was at 3.
clive.martin: is now at 2, and 1.7 is, sort of, Olympic standard. Yeah. So I'm thinking, well, that's interesting.
clive.martin: I mean, I had lost 2 stone in the 6 months taking some pills.
clive.martin: For the diabet… diabetes and stuff.
clive.martin: Which is a bit weird, but anyway. So…
clive.martin: they were a bit worried, so I had…
clive.martin: I think 3 weeks when I perhaps wasn't, perhaps, at my best.
clive.martin: Thinking about all these sort of things. So, I, …
clive.martin: I apologize if I didn't, ….
George Williams: Now, I… I… it's not like you, Clive, and I just wondered what was up, because normally you'd get back to me, or say something, or whatever, and it was just, like, all quiet under the Western Front, and I went.
clive.martin: Well, I was obviously very… so I don't know whether I missed… I went through a whole checklist, but I mean, luckily it's pretty easy to do now, checking all those things, so I apologize, because I was also slightly confused, because…
clive.martin: Your son emailed me.
George Williams: Yes, that's right.
clive.martin: So I didn't know… I didn't know what to say to him, what you said to him, so I was a bit like, okay, I better speak to George first, in regards to that.
George Williams: Yeah, no, that's fine. I mean, I think.
clive.martin: just… I think he was just introducing himself, Clive. Yeah, but I didn't know whether, that was….
George Williams: you told him, like, we'll get together, and I was thinking, okay, well, I better have a conversation first, blah blah blah. Yes, no, absolutely.
clive.martin: I don't know, I don't know where… don't know where we are. And I think then… then the second time, as soon as I come back, the world seems to sort of explode it into sort of,
clive.martin: thought process, and God knows what else has come. So, supposedly the quiet time in summer has exploded into sort of a potpourri of a whole lot of different issues.
George Williams: Yeah, and Solter seemed to be suffering from IT issues at the moment with one of their suppliers.
clive.martin: So, that, that has also not helped in the last, ….
George Williams: you can imagine.
clive.martin: And … I mean.
clive.martin: I'm probably the worst person to talk about this stuff, because I'm far too transparent, but, …
clive.martin: It seems to me that In the great world of data and all this stuff.
clive.martin: If someone attacks you, cyber attacks you.
clive.martin: The main defense of what you do is you switch it off.
George Williams: Yeah.
George Williams: I know.
clive.martin: Which… which seems to me a bit weird, because
clive.martin: When it's switched off, if it doesn't work, then people will think, well, what's…
clive.martin: what's wrong, unless… until they work out if they… so they… so they basically switched it off. I mean, …
clive.martin: It's interesting because there are lots of other big providers in the same position.
George Williams: Oh, really?
clive.martin: Well, I mean… It's… Yeah.
clive.martin: Pantander, HSBC, you know, the whole….
George Williams: Yeah, the whole one.
clive.martin: It's not, … But, … The great thing is no… there's no data, there's no risk, except… except….
George Williams: No, I've read it from the MD.
clive.martin: Well, I'll add them along. But in essence, and it was typical, because basically the price didn't move, and of course the market went up the week that it did it. So.
clive.martin: So I was hoping in my… and as I said to them, well, if it goes back on, then it's gone up, everyone's fund's gone up by 1%, they won't care.
George Williams: No.
clive.martin: But if they've gone down by 5%, then that might be a bit of a different issue.
George Williams: Yeah, I mean, for people like myself, it doesn't really matter, because, you know, I turn… I go on there maybe once a month and look at, where are we now? Oh, that's good, you know, it's gone up by that much, or it's gone down by that much. So, it doesn't really worry me that much, but I can imagine there must be a lot of people out there that actually
George Williams: manage their portfolio a lot closer than, sort of.
clive.martin: Well, I mean, to be honest, we're… I mean, we don't have many clients who do that.
George Williams: Right, okay.
clive.martin: Well… simply because….
George Williams: the whole purpose of coming to someone like ourselves is that….
clive.martin: So, if, you know, ultimately, at the end of the day, if you can see what it's doing all the time, if you want to, that's what a lot of people want to be able to switch on.
clive.martin: Two, if there's an issue in regards to performance, then obviously there's someone to talk to in regards to that, and blah blah blah, and of course, we've got all the stuff, you know. You probably, you know, I don't know, don't know how you feel, but, …
clive.martin: we over-egg information. We've got all that information on the portal, we've got, you know, the quarterly reports. I mean, there is no way people don't know how it's doing, good or bad.
George Williams: Right.
clive.martin: So, you know, in some respects, that hopefully is calming. We think that's a calming effect over time. And if, I mean, go back to COVID…
clive.martin: You know, we wrote a letter every month to say it has to get it's gone down by a bit more, blah blah blah, but…
clive.martin: Interestingly enough, the best feedback we ever got Was that people thought.
clive.martin: Well, they're just telling me all the time, and people are saying, well, no one else is writing to me.
clive.martin: It's like, why aren't they writing to me? And… and you guys at Salted are, like, churning out paperwork every week.
George Williams: That's right.
clive.martin: We, we think, we think it's a good idea, but look, it, it, …
clive.martin: in the modern world, as you, you know, when everything… everyone says, well, you should go digital, young man, you know, everything, you know, and speed of… of information is, you know, everyone wants it faster and faster. Well.
clive.martin: Trouble is, if someone cuts it off, or whatever, then it does have a slight problem.
George Williams: It has… it has a… and I mean, yeah, I mean, I was in it, as you know, for years, and it is… from what I can see now, it's getting more dangerous with AI and with what's happening in the marketplace, how people are going to actually
George Williams: secure their data.
George Williams: from certain elements of, scammers and whatever, I just find it ridiculous. You know, sometimes you go back to the old days, you had POW notes, and unless you were robbed, that was it. Your money was safe. Unfortunately, nowadays, it's just all up there in the cloud.
George Williams: And people get access to it. I don't care how good some of these people are, there's a better hacker somewhere that will get through the firewall, that will get through somewhere. It's… it's quite worrying.
clive.martin: Well, to a certain extent, that's true, and I think, I think, you know.
clive.martin: between Yumi and the Gatepost, we're investing quite a lot in cyber security companies, because of that reason, because obviously….
George Williams: Have to. Yeah, have to.
clive.martin: You have to. But I think, obviously, this is a third party, and this is just a stream of information of the data updating every day, the units and stuff. Yeah.
clive.martin: But it is an interesting test.
clive.martin: I mean, this is the way I look at it. So.
clive.martin: if they had got in, or they were worried about people getting in, and it got shut down, then they… they… there's no data lost in anything, so that's good. You can't lose any money, because it just means that…
clive.martin: So… and they are… they're the first port of call. So, obviously, if they… if they try to get into us, we've got ours as well, so… and the platforms, but… so it's got 3 levels to go through.
George Williams: Yeah, that's right.
clive.martin: But this… but this… so, in some respects, you know, because I'm in the same position as you, because I got the money in the company as well.
George Williams: Oh, you have? Oh, that's good to hear!
clive.martin: So, I'm thinking exactly the same way as a client, hopefully, would think.
clive.martin: … So they can't get that information, so…
clive.martin: In some respects, it's good, because the system's been tested.
clive.martin: … There's a… there's a… there's a few obvious issues.
clive.martin: Which is always about third-party risk being completely transparent. But we've decided, rightly or wrongly, that if there are any… someone who, you know.
clive.martin: Someone… was sadly having to Buy a house or something, and….
George Williams: Yes.
clive.martin: needed the money and all that sort of stuff. So, we've done all the…
clive.martin: All the stuff to get money away who's…
clive.martin: clients are needed urgently. And conversely, …
clive.martin: the money that's come in, which trains enough, we've got quite a lot of money coming in. Obviously, we can't invest it.
clive.martin: And we'll have to work out, but we will make that difference up, and then we have to go back to the cyber security insurance being a third party. But… but what we've decided to basically do… so…
clive.martin: Horrible as it sounds, it's actually probably a good test.
George Williams: Yes, it's all safe, yeah.
clive.martin: But, if I'm being really honest, doing a real test in the summer when most people are on a holiday, probably not so many people got… got so upset about it.
clive.martin: Yeah. You know, the ones who needed money.
clive.martin: So I had… I had 3 clients who were getting some money, and one was building a…
clive.martin: house, and they needed money on a regular thing for the next 3 months or something. That, you know, she would have been in real trouble with the builder if she couldn't, you know.
George Williams: Yes.
clive.martin: So, so, so there's always going to be some, but in reality, all the regular stuff's still going to get paid out and all that. So, you know, from that point of view, that's… that's not an issue. So, ….
George Williams: Yeah, it doesn't… it didn't worry me, it was just interesting to read about it, so….
clive.martin: Well, I think the other thing about it is, again, clients say, well, God, you're writing to us every day.
clive.martin: well, because we take these things seriously, it's not, it's not as if, you know, and poor old Adam, he has a work weekend and all that sort of stuff, so I sent him a little note saying, just in case you don't know, someone does love you, apart from the clients, you know, we all do appreciate the work you're doing. He said.
clive.martin: So, in the madness, it's nice to realize that some people does realize what work that we do. So, but, ….
George Williams: He said, I think, in the last communication, that it should be fixed this week.
clive.martin: Yeah, yeah, no, so, so, we're hoping that,
clive.martin: Because, I mean, I'm preaching to the converted.
clive.martin: So they think it'll get done, but we need to test that it is correct, and we need to check it. And then we've got to check it. I think Friday afternoon.
clive.martin: will be the, the D-Day, so that things should be up to date. Right. Going into the weekend, clients will see
clive.martin: Exactly where they are.
George Williams: See an update of where we are, where it's showing at the moment.
clive.martin: But….
George Williams: It might be Sod's Law, it went up last week by a percent, it might come down by a week….
clive.martin: It's still the same bloody price, which would be rather ironic, but there we go.
George Williams: That is quite good. I mean, I did have a quick review of the market, of the platform. Obviously, it's not completely up-to-date, but…
George Williams: I mean, in the last year, the market, and my money, seems to have gone up a flying rate. It's… the market's done very well, considering the state of the economy and labor and everything else at the moment.
clive.martin: Well, I think, I think, if… if I was being, comp… One of the…
clive.martin: Challenges going forward in the next decade.
clive.martin: Is… is actually trying to work out How you get diversity.
clive.martin: You know, because… If you're having, you know.
clive.martin: They're equities, but equities in general, I mean, yes, they're gross equities, and yes, there's some conservative equities, but if there's a crash, they all go down. It's a question about how much they go down by. Yeah.
clive.martin: You know, the bond market is all taken into interest rates and inflation, so, you know.
clive.martin: In general, most bomb markets around the world
clive.martin: behave the same. I mean, they're probably not so much at the moment, but you probably know what they're going to do. So to try and get a different slant on things is quite tricky.
clive.martin: If you, if you, if you have a… So…
clive.martin: So I'm the commodity buff on the IM committee, so on the asset, so we've had our highest commodity exposure of all time.
George Williams: Really?
clive.martin: So, and at the moment, that commodity exposure has been gold and silver.
clive.martin: So, if you… if you think about an average benchmark.
clive.martin: Yes. Most people have 0% in gold and silver.
George Williams: Okay.
clive.martin: So, we have had approximately ranging between 4% to 10% in the gold and silver market in the last 3 years in the portfolio.
clive.martin: And, gold's up 100%.
clive.martin: So, is it….
George Williams: Really?
clive.martin: Yep.
clive.martin: And gold has outperformed the S&P.
clive.martin: It's up 28% this year, and silver's up about 30%.
clive.martin: So unless you know about these things.
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: You don't notice it, because no one has it.
clive.martin: So you're a bit like the wolf, all on your own in the corner.
clive.martin: the only time you notice it, if you have a big position in these, what I call…
clive.martin: Slightly different vehicles.
clive.martin: It only matters if it basically goes the opposite way, because your diversification doesn't work.
George Williams: Right, okay, yeah, I'm good.
clive.martin: … But we do think… that commodities are in a bull market for the next decade.
George Williams: Oh, good.
clive.martin: Now… The trouble about… the trouble about commodities…
clive.martin: and much as I love commodities, they're smaller markets, they move quicker, and they're very volatile, both up and down.
clive.martin: So, yeah.
clive.martin: You have to be careful about sizing the position.
clive.martin: That makes sense. Yes, but no….
George Williams: 100%, I understand, yeah, yeah.
clive.martin: And also how you trade them, because, …
clive.martin: It's… it's difficult, … so you can have stop losses in… to a certain extent, in… in… a portfolio.
clive.martin: So if you had, you know, a massive amount of Apple shares, and you wanted to cut the position if it went through 220p, you could basically put a stop loss in there, and it all gets automatically sold. It's a bit harder to do that in the
clive.martin: In the commodity market. So, we are very, very diversified, for a number of reasons. One is that,
clive.martin: In general terms, the things that are… big capacity.
clive.martin: AI build data centers.
clive.martin: EVs.
clive.martin: You need a hell of a lot of copper.
George Williams: Yes, no, you're right, it is.
clive.martin: It's….
George Williams: And a lot of precious metals as well.
clive.martin: So it takes about 10 years to… to find and build a…
clive.martin: So you can't just turn the tattles, or I'd like to… I'd like to increase my copper, production by 300%, please.
George Williams: It's not possible. It doesn't happen.
clive.martin: And of course, the speed at which the EV market and those sort of things is adoption.
clive.martin: You know, everyone… everyone knows it's going to get to there at some point, but no one knows the, you know, how it gets there.
clive.martin: So, Norway, for example, is now, this year, 100% of its car sales are EVs.
George Williams: Really?
clive.martin: Now, that's… that's quite weird.
clive.martin: you know, say that in the UK, and then we'll go, well…
clive.martin: The only thing I want an EV car, because I'm not convinced I can fill it up further, how many out? You know, so that they're all… they're all going half what typical UK Conservative
clive.martin: They're in the hybrid market.
clive.martin: That's what's going on at the moment.
George Williams: Hybrid market is booming, electrical market is down by something like 50% of what they predicted, or less.
clive.martin: So, so… Each country has its own things, but it's all to do with the infrastructure.
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: Because if you had, … If everyone could have an EV car and you could, you know.
clive.martin: Plug it into your own home, and you all had solar panels.
clive.martin: you know, you'll be… you'll be kids in. But of course, How long that's gonna take.
George Williams: I think, though, Clive, yes, I agree with all that, but one of the biggest things that people are thinking about, and the conversation I'm having with people that are having exactly the same conversations as to why they don't want to buy an EV car.
George Williams: It's simply reason, is that the batteries are not there yet, and that a car
George Williams: A, you have to pay more for an EV car at the moment.
clive.martin: And B.
George Williams: literally, you drive it off the forecourt, and the price of it drops through the bottom, because after about 5 or 6 years, you won't be able to sell it, because people will go, well, I've only got about another 4 years' life out of it. Now, that is changing.
George Williams: But at the moment, the batteries are going, you know, they're… you know, after 10 years, you have to spend, like, thousands on new batteries. And at the moment, it does not make sense to buy an EV car.
clive.martin: I understand that logic.
clive.martin: … It.
clive.martin: It's pretty clear that If you're in the short journey world.
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: then the EV is, like, because you save however much you save in terms of petrol and all those other stuff, so… so I think…
clive.martin: 30-mile radius, if you're in and out of the, you know, it's quits in. As soon as you get past regular
clive.martin: 50 mile… 50 miles every day type thing. I… I understand that. … …
clive.martin: the speed at which these things happen. So, … But the, … so…
clive.martin: copper, gold, silver. Silver has been… this is going to be the fifth year of, decrease in terms of, production versus demand, so you, you know… Wow.
clive.martin: So… And if you look at the subsection of all those
clive.martin: Those little macro fights that are going on.
George Williams: Yeah, you know.
clive.martin: People… people… Why… why is Trump
clive.martin: wanting to get on with Ukraine is because it's got minerals.
George Williams: Very many precious minerals there that he's already signing that agreement with them for.
clive.martin: why is he… why does he not want to kill, China? Because they are the largest producers of those sort of things.
clive.martin: So he doesn't want to be cut short, he wants to buy some time to basically stop producing and all that sort of stuff.
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: So it's clear that we are in an economic war already.
George Williams: Oh, gosh, massive, yeah.
clive.martin: So, …
clive.martin: Having those sort of stuff, and then if you run out, you can't… if you run out, you can't grow.
George Williams: None.
clive.martin: And then you think of all the other stuff that buys with it.
clive.martin: With the platforms and stuff.
clive.martin: And, …
clive.martin: I was, I was, … what was the word I'd use? People were slightly gobsmacked when I said to them.
clive.martin: …
clive.martin: I'm now in my 60s, and this is the first time I can genuinely ask the question, is USA a capitalist country, or has it become a communist and left-wing party?
clive.martin: And my reason and rationale for that is, first time ever.
clive.martin: There's a company called MD Materials, which is basically the only mineral company in the US, based in Las Vegas.
George Williams: Oh, right.
clive.martin: And, …
clive.martin: rather interesting, slow little headlines that never really got into the UK press, but obviously I'm a bit of a commodity nerd. The US government invested $400 million
clive.martin: In… in shares in the company.
George Williams: Wow.
clive.martin: The following week, Apple
clive.martin: Bought 500 million pounds worth of stock as well, because they want guaranteed supply for some of the minerals that they want for their phones.
George Williams: Yeah?
clive.martin: So…
clive.martin: Did the government and Apple come to a nice little negotiation that basically has meant that that company has got the cap that needs to expand, and oh, and oh, and shit, oh, the share price went up 300% this year. Oh, that's interesting.
George Williams: Well, yeah.
George Williams: It is.
clive.martin: They don't care, as long as they're getting the stuff.
clive.martin: Yeah. That's the message that I'm getting.
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: And therefore, they don't, you know, don't worry about rules about, you know, shares and, you know, all that sort of stuff, so it's very, very… and of course.
clive.martin: this week.
clive.martin: I'm doing something about Intel.
clive.martin: That's the… over the… whatever the… whatever the acts that Biden did.
clive.martin: 400 million, or whatever, no, it was a bit more than that, actually. And, they're saying, oh, no, we're not gonna… we're gonna buy… we're gonna buy… we're gonna have to buy some equities in Intel, and the profit is gonna go back to the US, …
clive.martin: Just, … … In a central place where we'd keep all the money.
clive.martin: So they're now… so now they're… now they're giving money, but they're taking the profit and giving it back. It's like, hello?
clive.martin: That's communist behavior.
George Williams: Yeah, it is.
clive.martin: Well… Because if you said Donald Trump was a communist, you'd probably get a rather interesting hearing in the US.
George Williams: You would.
George Williams: Yeah, you have to… well, that's the problem with everything now, you have to be so careful what you say. You can't say a word out of place anywhere, otherwise to do good is it gonna fall on you like a ton of bloody…
George Williams: Bricks.
clive.martin: So, the world is definitely changing.
clive.martin: And therefore, just going back to diversification, you have to…
clive.martin: … decide on what diversification, how those diversification cases, you know. So, …
clive.martin: You've got that weird thing with… European defense stocks.
clive.martin: Now, for the first time, Europe is basically coughing up and going to spend some money, and they're up 150-200% this year.
clive.martin: Because finally, Well, I mean, they've… they…
clive.martin: not… they've not wanted to do all that sort of stuff. Now they've got no choice but cough up and pay for the defense of… against Russia.
George Williams: Yeah….
clive.martin: Yeah.
clive.martin: So, part of the reason and rationale is that having that… But…
clive.martin: There are still lots of people who get very scared.
clive.martin: When they go climbing. This is so off-piste.
clive.martin: our allocation in that area. I said, Well…
clive.martin: To be honest, we've been underweight.
clive.martin: And they look at me and go, what do you mean they were underweight? Well…
clive.martin: It doesn't happen very often.
clive.martin: So if you're in a cyclical bull market for commodities, then…
clive.martin: If you're not in it, you… they get… they will go up 300%.
clive.martin: And I said to him, you look at the last disaster.
clive.martin: That people forget about. Do you remember crude oil, what crude oil got to in, in, in COVID?
George Williams: Yes.
clive.martin: It got to minus 10.
George Williams: It was… yeah.
clive.martin: So, basically.
clive.martin: The world's dead, we don't need any oil, we're getting rid of it. We're gonna give it away.
George Williams: I know, it's weird, isn't it? It's just….
clive.martin: And it went from minus 10…
clive.martin: 280. So I said… so I said to them, so what return am I getting? And some bright sparks that we can't work that out, because if you start with a minus, it never works out. I said, okay, we'll just deal… deal with naught then.
George Williams: So….
clive.martin: So these things are… But you…
clive.martin: you've got to be… you've got to be in it to win it, as they say. So, it's…
clive.martin: It's a fascinating time in the world, it's not…
clive.martin: I don't think it's going to carry on being… being like that, but… but… but… In the sense that…
clive.martin: We think it's going to be easier
clive.martin: and I say this with trepidation, looking at your face, it's easier to make an okay return
clive.martin: You know, in the 5% campaign.
clive.martin: Then trying to make a lot of money, because you'd have to be…
clive.martin: Either lucky, or you get your timing right in some of that stuff.
clive.martin: You know, uranium's up 85% this year.
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: … Who, who would say you'd have uranium in your portfolio?
clive.martin: … Or, or nuclear energy. You know, if nuclear energy comes back.
clive.martin: which it… which it probably will do as part of the whole thing, then that's gonna be. And then…
clive.martin: We've actually got some carbon in our… in our portfolio. Carbon permits, I mean….
George Williams: Really?
clive.martin: That's really, you know, I mean, it's 0.5% of the portfolio.
clive.martin: But if you said that to someone and went, oh, I've got carbon in my portfolio, they go, what the fuck do you want that for?
George Williams: Why?
clive.martin: What?
clive.martin: And then, we will, at some point.
clive.martin: Be able to have some…
clive.martin: Bitcoin and all that sort of stuff, long and short, hopefully.
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: Yeah. There's lots of little divers… so the world's… …
clive.martin: In terms of that, but the most important thing is the clients are getting the returns they're expecting, and they're doing the things that they want to do with their money. That's… that's the way we always think about this stuff.
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: But at the same time, we've got a very big position, some very low-risk stuff, like…
clive.martin: Two, two, two-year bonds.
clive.martin: And they're giving us, you know, 4% with no risk, unless the US government goes bust.
George Williams: Yeah, yeah.
clive.martin: I mean….
George Williams: Yeah, I mean, it's funny enough, this week, all I've had is letters from Chantendere, Halifax, I mean, I haven't got lots of money with them or anything, just saying, you know, please note our interest rates have gone down.
George Williams: And they're going down, seems like, everywhere at the moment. Yeah. So, I mean, I think the best I've got at the moment is 3.6 from Investec.
George Williams: Which I think is still pretty good, actually. ….
clive.martin: So, so… I think I've told you before about raisin.
George Williams: Yes. Yeah.
clive.martin: Well, if you looked on Raisin, if you've got your iPad there.
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: Go on. Look under it now, Raisin, and look under flexible accounts. I think you'll find that some… still some good rates available, and you can still get some good fixed rates as well.
George Williams: Really. It's really annoying, actually, because…
George Williams: For some reason, the rugby club… I'm not in the finances side, but the rugby club had 14 grand, which it said, … well, it's just sitting in an account, this was last year, so we'll invest it in a bond, and I didn't look at it.
George Williams: And they got the results back, and it was something like, you know, 2.5% from a fixed bond.
George Williams: And I went, hang on a minute, you surely must have done better than that. And they just reinvested it again at about the same rate. And I said, well, I know you can get a lot better rate of interest from a lot of other companies on things like that, so I don't know who he was using or why he was using them.
clive.martin: … Yeah, I mean… Hash management is also going to be quite important, I think, going forward.
clive.martin: The big banks are basically cleaning up. They're just slashing rates.
clive.martin: And they're making on the arbitrage, but some of these newer ones, where am I?
George Williams: Savings accounts.
George Williams: Yeah, 4.29% Aldermere.
George Williams: 4.28.
George Williams: 4.26… You get some good rates, can't you?
George Williams: I've never heard of any of those, but there you go!
clive.martin: So, so, so that's the first thing that most clients talk to me about. And by the way, this is not a Saltous recommendation, this is just a Clyde Martin thing, you should have a look at it.
George Williams: Blade Martin.
George Williams: You should have started your own business up, Clive.
clive.martin: Well, plenty should say that, no, no, I'm joking. But, …
clive.martin: the reason why I like it
clive.martin: as… to suggest, have a look. You can't get…
clive.martin: you can't buy more than the maximum amount under the FSA in one account, so if the maximum's $85,000,
clive.martin: You can put no more than $85,000 in that account if you're doing a 1-year fixed bond, or a 3-year fixed bond, or whatever.
clive.martin: So, in other words, you can't… the money can't be lost under the FSA compensation scheme.
clive.martin: Does that make sense?
George Williams: Right, yeah. Is it 85,000 now?
clive.martin: It is £85,000. Yeah, sorry, you're looking at me, and I was thinking, yes. So, so the fixed rate… Yes. So, so….
George Williams: They all say they're FCS protected, so….
clive.martin: So, so…
clive.martin: Some of the banks, you may not, sort of, have a, sort of, penchance for, like, …
clive.martin: Alryan Bank, you can guess where that's probably coming from. But…
clive.martin: But they all have to apply to the FCA scenario.
clive.martin: So,
George Williams: It's 85,000, it says here, yeah, max 85.
clive.martin: So, all of them… They can't get on, so…
clive.martin: From that point of view, if they go bust, Yes, Greg. So… …
clive.martin: So, it means when you've got your millions, George, sort of floating around your cash bank, you'll have to give a lot of $85,000s. That's the only problem.
George Williams: Yeah, that is very true, isn't it? You'd have to invest in quite a lot.
clive.martin: But, but, even on the easy access.
clive.martin: The top easy access on that is 4.26 with a company called Shawbrook.
George Williams: Right. … So, all I'm saying is, I mean, some of these rates are coming down, but… Yeah.
clive.martin: These are the most attractive in the market, because they're just trying to get the money in,
George Williams: They've got a loan book and they want to fill it up. Yeah. No, no, no, absolutely. So, I mean, I think… I think last year, my portfolio in a year, when I looked at it this morning, I think in a year was around 7.6%.
clive.martin: Your portfolio with us?
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's about… sounds about right. That sounds about right. Yeah. And… and obviously, if you go at 7%, that compounds at, that doubles over 10 years.
George Williams: Yeah, I mean, even… I mean, I think over something like…
George Williams: I think I looked at 3-year one, was the other one, and that was… I was quite gobsmacked by that, it was 21%.
clive.martin: Yeah.
George Williams: Over 3 years, which, you know, in….
clive.martin: Which includes one of the worst years ever.
George Williams: Yeah, absolutely. I mean, it's like, yeah.
George Williams: So, I think since… since COVID, near enough, we've really, sort of, come out of the… Thank you.
clive.martin: COVID is… from COVID to now, it's been our best five years ever.
George Williams: Yeah. Yeah, I haven't looked… I didn't look at 5 years, but I looked at 3.
clive.martin: Well, if you remember COVID 2000 and 2000, it went down 36% in 6 weeks.
George Williams: I know. I know!
George Williams: Look at it, then. I knew what it was going to be like, so I don't… I don't like inflicting pain on myself. You know, I'm one of these people that goes, can I do anything about that?
George Williams: No, I can't. Well, I could have done. I could have said, sell everything up now. I don't want to lose any more money. But at the end of the day, you will… it will go… it goes back. When it goes down, it always comes back. I mean, I've got a very simple philosophy about these things, you know, you can't…
George Williams: You can't do anything about it, so you just get on with your life, and it is what it is.
clive.martin: But I remember those meetings so well, because …
clive.martin: you have to be quite disciplined in your training, so when things go down a lot.
clive.martin: You have to rebalance back to your original, because if you had a 60% in bonds and… sorry, 60% in equities, 40% in bonds, and then your 60% in equity suddenly becomes 35%, and your bonds becomes… you have to… you have to sell your bonds and buy more equity.
clive.martin: And that… for the youngsters, I could see it almost like they were crying, they were like.
clive.martin: you're just buying into it, you know, you're gonna cut your hands off, this is gonna be a disaster. Anyway, down 36, ended up up 20.
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: Fastest turnaround ever.
clive.martin: And they were like.
clive.martin: Well, why did we do that? I said, because in stressful times, you have to have a process, and you have to stick to it.
George Williams: Yeah.
George Williams: No, I agree.
clive.martin: So, you know…
George Williams: Well, you know….
clive.martin: The vaccine helped, shall we say?
clive.martin: And who… who knows, who knows that the great Oxford University saved our bacon?
clive.martin: So, both for the country and for the investment community, because that, that, …
clive.martin: But anyway, we slightly digress. So, …
clive.martin: In your own words, what would you like to talk about today? And, … Right.
George Williams: Okay, very… I mean, overall, as you know, I'm very happy with what you do, and what the company does, and I've got, you know, if I ever speak to anybody, I always talk to them about Salters and what they've done for me, and whatever. So I, you know, I follow it, and whatever. So there's a few things that I've got. Let me update you with Gareth. So, Gareth…
George Williams: a year ago, okay. …
George Williams: he… he fell out with a new director that had come in. So he was just one below the board, this new board member, director, had come from, quite a harsh PR company. He worked for… Gareth worked for Weber Shandwick, who are literally one or two in the world PR companies.
George Williams: And they brought in this other guy from… I can't remember the name of the company now, but it's their….
clive.martin: Other, number one, number two in the world.
George Williams: But they were always known as a very hard, harsh company. The directors, you know, if you don't perform, you're out, bang. Anyway, Weber got hold of him, he became Gareth's boss.
George Williams: And Gareth gets on with everybody, but this guy took an instant dis… dislike, or Gareth took an instant dislike to him about the way he was treated.
George Williams: or way he was treating him. Right, you're not going to live in Tahoe anymore, you're going to move back to San Francisco, da-da-da-da-da. And he said, no need to do that, that's why I was allowed to move here, etc. Anyway, they were making redundancies, and Gareth knew his name was at the top of the list.
George Williams: And, as Atoms last.
George Williams: I think it was about last May time, he was told. So, he was given quite a time for them, he was given about 2 months, 3 months to actually
George Williams: … you know, notice period, which he did, and he set up his own company called Human First.
George Williams: And it basically was just a PR company, and he had a lot of clients that wanted to work with him from previous clients that he'd dealt with. IBM, Digital, you know, there were large companies, and he sold… he didn't have to sell his services, they said, would you do this project for us, would you do that?
George Williams: And he was making a lot of money out of it. However, he… he didn't like
George Williams: the insecurity of running his own company. He's not that type of person.
George Williams: And he's always wanted to try and get out of the, the agency side, because, you know, he was agency side, and that's a completely different philosophy and work pattern of when you're actually working within a company.
George Williams: So, anyway, one of the people, that he met worked for a company called Syngenta. I don't know whether you've heard of Syngenta.
clive.martin: Yes, I'll do nursing.
George Williams: You know, a multi-billionaire, a billion comfort, billion pound company.
George Williams: Anyway, one of the guys contacted me and said, I've been chatting to one of my colleagues in IBM, and we have this position.
George Williams: open for, PR… A director, for comms, et cetera, da-da-da.
George Williams: And I would like to interview for it. So he went for the interview, he was interviewed by 2 or 3 people.
George Williams: Got down to the shortlist of two, and unfortunately he didn't get the job.
George Williams: Because, the guy who did get the job was a BBC, would you believe, journalist.
George Williams: who had all these contacts in the agricultural world. That was his job. Gareth didn't have that, because he's just come from a pure IT background.
clive.martin: Yeah, sure.
George Williams: So… but the guy, his… one of the directors of Xinjiang, to turn around and said, Gareth, I really do like you, I like what you're portraying, I like what you're doing, da-da-da-da-da. He said, so…
George Williams: Bear with me, we're gonna give you a contract.
George Williams: For 6 months, on stupid money.
George Williams: he said, will you sign up for 6 months? So, this was in… by the time this was, in September time?
George Williams: No, later than that. It must have been about October time.
George Williams: He said, we'll give you a contract, but that's it. You have to get rid of all your other clients, we just want you for 6 months.
George Williams: And it was ridiculous money that he was offering. So Gareth said, yeah, but why? He said, because…
George Williams: I've got a… I need to find a role for you. And Gareth went, oh, alright, fair enough. So Gareth was very happy, he was getting paid oodles of money, and he really loved it. This… it gave him a new breath of life, because he was dealing with something he didn't know, agriculture. Who knows about agriculture when you're working in IT?
George Williams: But he… he'd learned about it, fantastically, and in February, the guy said, look, we…
George Williams: we're pretty certain we've got a job. In March, they said, we have got a job, but you need to now come over to Basel in Switzerland, where one of their base and their main directors are. Go over there and be interviewed. So he went over there, and he said, but we need you over here for two weeks.
George Williams: He went, oh, all right then. So, we went out there in the in-between weekend, and had a lovely weekend in Basel with him. But he was interviewed, got on with all the guys, and they finally, I think it was in about May, said, right, we'll offer you a job.
George Williams: Starting the 1st of August. That's slipped back to the 1st of September because of the problems of moving back.
George Williams: And they've basically said, you're on this salary.
George Williams: Which I've, like, fainted on. And they said.
clive.martin: Where, and where's he based?
George Williams: he's… well, that's it. He's moving back to the UK. He's gonna be based, actually, in, Oxford. Well, not Oxford, it's in, Goring. I don't know whether you know Goring?
clive.martin: I do not go against you. Yeah.
George Williams: So he's about 5 minutes out of Goring, where he's renting a place.
clive.martin: Right.
George Williams: We have hired a van tomorrow, and I'm taking, literally, a massive long-wheelbase van with all his stuff that he left here 16 years ago, and other stuff we've bought. I bought him a car, I've had to lend him…
George Williams: Shed loads of money, because he's still trying to get his money out of the U.S. easily, and whatever.
George Williams: So, and that's another part I need to talk to you about. Anyway, this is a background. So, I'm delivering it all to a house that we finally rented accommodation in… in Goring, that he's moving into. It's a beautiful house, a 5-bedroom house.
George Williams: near enough right on the Thames. He's doing that, and he's moving, …
George Williams: So, we're moving everything tomorrow, going up there, it'll be tomorrow and Saturday to build stuff and do stuff and get, you know… you know what it's like, just… because they've got nothing. Their container is coming over with everything they own, and they… when I say they didn't own a lot, they lived in furnished accommodation.
clive.martin: Yeah.
George Williams: Lake Tahoe. Yeah. So, he hasn't got loads of beds, so we've been having to buy beds and stuff like that from everywhere. Anyway, …
George Williams: They're moving into this place for a year while they look for a place up there, because that's where they want to live. One of their head offices is in Reading.
George Williams: another one in Bracknell, and he's got people up in Manchester. He flew over to China last week, because he's got a team over there, he's got a team in New York, he's got a team in San Francisco. Basically, what he's doing, he's heading up the AI
George Williams: for Syngenta in their comms. So it's all around AI comms, for…
George Williams: the process of what they're doing. I mean, it's amazing what he said, because he only knows so much about it, I know even less, but it's a matter of what fertilizer do you put in this ground.
George Williams: To give these results with this particular crop, or whatever.
clive.martin: Yep.
George Williams: compared to the forecasts, you know, they're making. And AI is being able to create these chemicals and fertilizers and whatever to do this.
George Williams: Anyway, but I didn't know until recently, as he said, that it's a… it's now a Chinese-owned company. I didn't know that, but it's now Chinese-owned. Well.
George Williams: everyone seems… every company now seems to be owned by the Chinese, like, you know, I found out Volkswagen are owned by the Chinese as well, and you just… they're all owned by the Chinese, aren't they?
clive.martin: Well, I mean, the, the other…
clive.martin: going back to the whole commodity thing, the big thing is, is having, food and agriculture, and Syngenta is one of the biggest suppliers of fertilization of crop, so you're… the whole world is trying to think about how you get crop fertilization cheaper, quicker, more efficient, and productivity up.
clive.martin: So, it's leading that challenge, and of course, the Chinese, with the most amount of people in the world.
clive.martin: They are the ones that are likely to be starved or not correctly if they don't control it, so…
clive.martin: It's probably that's… it's another big battle.
George Williams: Yeah. So anyway, Gareth's got this role, he starts actually on the 1st of September, because he moves back
George Williams: on Monday, so he's flying in with a whole family and about 15 suitcases, apparently. Because they have to live for the next 2 months until this container comes over with whatever stuff they've got left, and anyway…
George Williams: So, he plans to be there, which is great. It'll be lovely for us, because we'll be able to see him on a more regular basis.
George Williams: So, so that's that, basically. He, he is, he is very well paid, let's put it that way. He's gonna be strapped for cash.
George Williams: Currently, because… He's put one of the children into Mulfsford. Have you heard of Mulford Boys School?
clive.martin: I happen to have that. It's just out….
George Williams: It's just outside Goring, Molford. Okay.
George Williams: And the other one is a, …
George Williams: the next one up, because that's only a prep school, for Isla, their eldest, and they're going to somewhere called Ship Lake.
George Williams: Good lake, yeah. Yeah, so that's where… they will both go there in the end, and as will the third one as well. So it's private school as well, so he was a little bit… when we found out, well, because that's the other thing we've been doing. My feet haven't touched the ground in the last four months. We've been going up there on a regular basis with either him or his wife.
George Williams: Looking at all these hundreds of schools around that area, and then, you know, the following day, looking at loads of properties, and we've been doing that literally every
George Williams: day for I don't know how long, but it's finally all come, and I've said, once he's back on Monday, we're collecting him from the airport without 3 cars. I said, that's it! I'm cutting him off for 3 months. There's none of this. Dad, can you come and help me do this? Dad, can you come and help me do that?
George Williams: So, yeah.
George Williams: I've loved it, actually, I really have. It's been… been great. Back in the negotiating stakes, as well, with people like car dealers. No, no, you're not gonna sell me. No, I know it's the end of your month. No, yeah. So, yeah, he's done that. Now.
George Williams: The one thing why he wanted to introduce you to it is he has got…
George Williams: a financial advisor over in the States at the moment.
clive.martin: Housing. Yeah.
George Williams: Now, this fire… I don't know how much money he's got there, I think quite a lot of money, because it's… they've been in rental.
George Williams: So he's got quite a lot of money saved up.
George Williams: Over there. Which obviously he wants to put into a house here as well, or some of it, but he's got money invested.
George Williams: But he also is keen to have, you know, someone to let him know what to do with his money, and to reinvest it. The guy over there is saying, oh, I can do it all for you, I can do it all from here, and we'll keep the money invested here.
George Williams: But Gareth is now going, actually, you know what? I don't want it invested in America anymore. I want to try and get it out of there and bring it back here.
George Williams: So, hence why he wants to start a conversation with you yourself, and I don't know what it's got it in, I haven't gone into it, Clyde, and I thought it was best if, when he's around, to set up a meeting with yourself.
clive.martin: No, no, look, that's great. I mean, just to be, black and white, obviously there is, …
clive.martin: difficulty. I can't advise on any of his stuff in the US.
clive.martin: No, no, no, no. He would have to make a decision to say.
clive.martin: And obviously take tax advice from the US, that if he sold any of his stuff, what tax he'd pay, and all that type of stuff.
clive.martin: Yeah. So, once the money is in the UK.
George Williams: You can do something.
clive.martin: then basically, I can just go through the whole, whole process in regards to what you can and can't do. But I think, I think, …
clive.martin: It's a very, very different… game.
clive.martin: financial planning in the US versus financial planning in the UK. So there's… there's quite a lot of different rules and regulations that he probably either doesn't… doesn't know or thinks will be a bit strange and all that type of stuff. Yeah. So, and…
clive.martin: So, no, I'm… great, lovely to have a chat with him, and no problems at all. …
clive.martin: But I… I will… I will walk him through slowly, you know, all the UK stuff, because, there will be lots of stuff he can basically do, and, lots of stuff. But… but clearly, you know, he's got to get his feet under the table, he's got to get his house sorted out, he's got to get his….
George Williams: 100%. I've started this conversation off early, because, you know, one of the things he said, Dad, I need over the next year, is to get my money out from you so that I can invest it as a deposit in a house.
George Williams: So that's one of the things he wants to do. So he's got his pension invested out there as well, which he wants to get out, if possible, to over here. He doesn't want his pension over there anymore.
George Williams: So, it's those type of things that he.
clive.martin: Yeah, no, no, look, there's, there's, I mean…
clive.martin: I mean, I'll do whatever I can to help and… Yeah, yeah.
George Williams: Oh, yeah.
clive.martin: production and, and so forth. Just, just going back to the, … Because I looked, …
clive.martin: Do you have a detailed amount that you… that… that… okay, so, and I thought you would have, because I'm glad you have, because I wasn't absolutely 100% certain,
clive.martin: So, how much do you think was invested in him, for him, as it were, and when, and when, when, when did you basically
clive.martin: Oh, okay. You did it, as it were.
George Williams: Hang on a minute, Clive, because I think I sent you, I think, I don't know, half the time. Where am I? Sorry, I'm just going through some emails for finance, EF High, Soltus, Lorica.
George Williams: Here we go, the solstice, let's have a good… oh, it might have been put under carrot investment.
George Williams: No, that was 20 solters here. I have got… I have got more notes on it somewhere, so hang on.
George Williams: Yeah, here we are, Cara's around.
George Williams: So, he invested $80,000….
clive.martin: Yep.
George Williams: in March 2018, And I think that was split between myself and Alison's account.
clive.martin: Okay.
George Williams: And then he invested a further $19,000.
George Williams: on the 8th of April, 2021.
clive.martin: Okay, so we've got $80,000 for 7 years, and we've got $19,000 for 4 years.
George Williams: Yeah, basically, I mean, it's not… as Gareth said to me, Dad, it's not going to be exact, he said, but as long as I've got a ballpark… a ballpark figure of how much that type of is worth now, he said then, you know, when we start looking, he's got to start financially planning, basically.
clive.martin: He's got to understand, he's got to work out how much you can pay for, and all that sort of stuff, yeah.
George Williams: Yeah, so that's what he's got to work out now, how much, you know, what he's got. So if we could get a type of figure for that, and then we can get that. The other thing was, as I said to him, I said it might be worthwhile, and I don't know, you know, the trouble is he's going to draw it out straight away, maybe when he buys a house.
George Williams: is to invest it, you know, if I give it to you, because the reason we couldn't open up an account for him, because he wasn't a resident of the UK, he's now going to be a resident for the UK, so I wonder whether it might be easier to withdraw it now and put it into his own account with you.
George Williams: Or to just to leave it until he works out the pension, and then open up an account with you. I… I don't know.
clive.martin: … I think the issue, …
clive.martin: Can I answer that question once I work out what the number is? Please, please do. And, I mean, look, at the end of the day, …
clive.martin: If… if…
clive.martin: whatever the money is worth, and he thinks that money will be used for a property purchase, if that's what he's basically saying. If his number one goal is to say, right, that money is… I've allocated to property purchase, then there's no point opening an account for him, because basically it's just going to go straight out again.
George Williams: Absolutely, that's what I thought, yeah.
clive.martin: So, but if… if… if he says, yes, I'm going to take that money out and put that, but basically, I'm interested in opening an account, and this is the conversation we're going to have, blah blah blah, then…
clive.martin: That… that's… that's a separate thing, but I think…
clive.martin: I don't want to prejudice the thing, but if… but, you know, his number one goal would be to sort out a house, I think, probably.
George Williams: It will be in the next… you know how long it'll take to get a house, Clive. I mean, by the time they get back here, Christmas, and then putting offers in, and finding something they like, I think it might.
clive.martin: Yeah, no, I agree.
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: No, no, no, no, I agree. So, my gut reaction, is, I mean, obviously, I'm happy to meet him at any time when it's convenient to him, so, …
clive.martin: And then we'll firm that up, and if… if he's basically saying… saying that, then obviously we can sell the stuff at any point, and then you can… you can do it. So, probably… I mean.
clive.martin: flexibility is probably going to be his big key, because, you know, Sobslaw, if he finds a place and he can really move quickly, then he might want to go for it, as it were.
George Williams: Yeah, I know. Okay. Well, let's do that. I mean, again, he needs to get his feet under the table in the UK anyway. He's gonna be, sort of, like, off the scale at the moment for the next, I would say, 2 months, but I just wanted to start getting the….
clive.martin: No, no, look, look… And briefly.
George Williams: Beautiful.
clive.martin: Yeah, no, that's fantastic. What I would basically, …
clive.martin: suggested. I'm very happy to go and see him wherever he is. Right, okay. At a convenient place. And then, basically, I think the first thing is just to start the conversation about what he's looking for in an advisor, what is… what is the whole thing, and then, slowly but surely, then… and then we can talk to him about that, just…
clive.martin: he definitely doesn't want to rush it, but I think it's important just so young… he gets into the whole thought process, because I think…
clive.martin: I don't know any of his benefits that he's going to get here, and all that sort of stuff, and obviously, I don't know what he earns, and therefore, from what you're saying, he's going to be rather shocked in terms of taxation issues over here, maybe.
George Williams: It's in excess of 300.
clive.martin: Right, okay. So, so, you know…
clive.martin: he's paying 47 cents from over 125, that might be a bit of a… he might be, sort of, need to sit down and have a drink first.
George Williams: I know, I think he's gonna get a shock with how much tax he's gonna have to pay on all that, and it's not quite the same as in the US. I've already said that to him, so… I think he realizes he's not… But on the other hand, there are lots of things he can do.
clive.martin: So, you know, there's not… it's not the end of the world. I mean, it's a nice problem to have, rather than a… well, a nasty problem.
George Williams: Well, it's a nice problem that you… you can help him solve. That's the way I… I…
George Williams: put it to you, put it to him, because I didn't, you know, when… when I first met you, God, all those years ago now, when I said, right, HP, I'm going, and yeah, I've got 5 pensions here, there, everywhere. It was, you know, it was…
George Williams: it was brilliant, and that's what I say to everybody at the moment, it's just, you know, the only problem is Labour Company now are bloody…
George Williams: you know, I can't leave all the money to the kids now, because they're going to claim 40% of it, so it's… it won't affect me and Al, but it will mean that they… they claim their fair share of it now, but I think that might well change if the… if another party gets back in, but we'll wait and see.
clive.martin: We'll come back to… we'll come back to that question. …
clive.martin: Okay, so, just to recap on that then, I'll, I'll, I'll work some numbers out in regards to that. Happy to meet him whenever, whenever he's around, and we can, we can, … Yeah.
clive.martin: we can do that, and thank you very much for the referral, that's very kind of you. So, just, just going back to,
clive.martin: To you, and … Charming wife. What's… she's still working.
George Williams: So, I'm just saying goodbye to my grandchildren.
clive.martin: Oh, hello?
clive.martin: Have you tell him he's playing the wrong sport?
George Williams: Yeah, I know.
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: I get in trouble for saying things like that, but I can say that to you.
George Williams: But I do.
George Williams: Yeah, sorry. With regard to me, yeah?
clive.martin: So, … Allison, still working.
George Williams: Less and less and less, Clyde, but she still works bank.
George Williams: You know, like, she hasn't worked for the last 2 months.
George Williams: I think she's got a couple of shifts booked next month.
George Williams: But she is still working. I tried to find out her pension pot the other day.
clive.martin: Yep. And TPT, who it's with, have you heard of TPT?
clive.martin: Can't they have TPT? They are… what's that stand for?
George Williams: I don't know.
clive.martin: But anyway, their systems are being….
George Williams: being transferred for the last 3 months, it's just been a nightmare. So many complaints about it. Anyway, anyway, it's done, and they finally did it, and I looked through, and she's got a healthy pot in there now of, like, I'm sure it's something like about 80 or 90,000 she's got in.
George Williams: So, I mean, we've always said, because she gets such good returns from her working and.
clive.martin: No, no, no, no.
George Williams: contribution.
clive.martin: Absolutely.
George Williams: But, I mean, it's getting to the stage now where she's saying… I mean, she's 70 this year.
clive.martin: Well, I mean, I mean, I… I….
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: I admire her, but she obviously still enjoys doing what she's doing, so, you know, if she still enjoys it, then who am I to say you don't know what you're doing?
George Williams: 100%, and that's what I say, you know.
George Williams: need to do it. You don't need to go to work. We're not, we're not, you know, need the money.
clive.martin: Rap for cash.
George Williams: Yeah, I said, we don't need the money. I said, at the moment, I said I want to try and spend as much money as I can, and I bloody, you know, Labour government bloody didn't get hold of it, but, you know, that… I think we've always said about financial planning for the long term.
George Williams: And that's now starting to come to fruition, where, well.
George Williams: do I start spending a lot more of this money, or what can I do? I mean, the big problem is, I mean, we've talked about private schools. He's sending his two, three, to private school.
George Williams: The big problem I have with that, of doing it, then my daughter can't afford to send her children to private school. I can't pay for those two.
George Williams: And then not for the others. So, I'm in a bit of a catch-22 situation. I can't afford to pay 5 of them. Thank you very much. I'm not that wealthy. Well, I would, I could, but the trouble is, I wouldn't be left with a lot.
clive.martin: …
clive.martin: Okay, can I… can I… before I answer that question, because I think that's quite a specific one, I think I've got… I've got a thing that I think you need to chew over in your head. Okay. I'm doing quite a lot this time, but let… so do you think Alison will… this is going to be her last year?
George Williams: I… I… she said… I think it will definitely be… I'll tell you why, she has to go through, …
George Williams: re-registration, which means revalidation, it's called, that's the word I was looking for. Revalidation, which means that she's had to have done all these courses during the year, do this, do that. Now, she renewed it last year, I think it was.
George Williams: And it lasts for 2 years. So, at some point this year, so next year, she will retire, definitely, and she will come off the bank. Because once… once you haven't been revalidated, she can't go back to work.
clive.martin: Yeah, no, sure. Well, not that… if you're gonna retire.
clive.martin: and stop work. You should retire by the end of…
clive.martin: The end of the tax year.
George Williams: Okay, alright.
clive.martin: Because it's… because then you go into a new tax year with no income.
George Williams: Yep.
clive.martin: Yeah. That's the perfect thing to do for maximizing the scenario. Not that I'm trying to force her in any shape or form to retire, she wants to go on longer than that, but that's the best time to do it, in the sense of
clive.martin: Simplicity.
clive.martin: And then if she's happy, then we can… we can move the money across from that pension, and then basically that's it. Now, …
clive.martin: So, if I'm jumping ahead now and thinking that's going to happen at some point, let's just.
George Williams: Yep.
clive.martin: Put that in the scenario.
George Williams: Definitely.
clive.martin: … What impact do you think that's going to have in your income requirement?
clive.martin: Basically going forward. So, if you both of you aren't working, what do you think your income need is going to be?
George Williams: She was drawing down, basically, on an average, I would think, over the last year.
George Williams: around… £1500 a month, approximately.
clive.martin: Hang on.
clive.martin: Yep.
clive.martin: And, from your point of view.
clive.martin: the income you're getting at the moment, is that… is that still okay? Is it not enough, or what… Yes.
George Williams: It's just started to going, oh, my bank balance is a bit low, …
George Williams: I'm… I'll top it up from some of my other ones. Oh, we need to go on holiday. Oh, I'll take that out of my invest tech. Because what I've always been trying to do, as you know, Clive, is to clear out all of my other odds.
clive.martin: Have you got one of your famous spreadsheets that you can send me again to give me an update in terms of that?
George Williams: No.
clive.martin: No.
clive.martin: Yeah, I'll send it over to you. What's your cash reserve at the moment, just roughly, as it were?
George Williams: Roughly, rough… oh god, I haven't even got a clue, but I can.
clive.martin: within a click of a button. I'm going to test your great systems, I know they all do.
George Williams: The thing is that it is, … no, no. It is quite a bit down at the moment, only because I've lent Gareth about $23,000 to buy this car. So….
clive.martin: What is that for?
George Williams: Yeah, absolutely. So… that I would say… investments, here we go, sorry. Investments in June, doom-dum-dum…
George Williams: So, GIAs are… like, sand down there, here we go.
George Williams: So, I would say, in total, I've got…
George Williams: Where's that come from? No. Total cash, 143,000.
George Williams: No, that's not right.
George Williams: 31… 9, 40, 40, 70… yeah, it is. It's about 130,000, I would say, Clive.
clive.martin: Okay, fine. So, that's… that's… that's… that's plenty cash reserve, cash, cash reserve, as… as… as I would say, unless you're telling me otherwise.
George Williams: No, no, it's absolutely superb at the moment, because what I… what I tend to do is, like, I took the family away on holiday, you know, spent 20 grand at the beginning of the year. I'm thinking about…
George Williams: my car's 6 years old, and I'm thinking about getting a new car.
clive.martin: ….
George Williams: Not an electric one.
George Williams: So yes, I'm thinking about it, but at the moment, that… those type of things, those extra…
George Williams: if you like, spend, I'm doing. I have noticed that, you know, again, my, …
George Williams: my day-to-day costs, as everything, has just gone up. Yeah. So, yeah, I mean, if you remember, I did take it down during COVID, because we just weren't spending any money at all, and I thought, what's the point of it getting paid it? I don't need it.
clive.martin: Yep.
George Williams: It then went up again.
George Williams: And I'm not sure where I am on my… that was the other question I wanted to ask, where I am on my tax-free amount of pension.
clive.martin: That's a good question. I don't know off the top of my head. I can… I can definitely find that out. Yes.
George Williams: Yeah, I don't know how much… how much more… I mean, we did that… oh my god.
George Williams: 10 years ago, I suppose, when I retired, actually. So we've been… I don't know how much we took out of it, and how much I had at that point, but, but….
clive.martin: Just remember, we just did the personal allowance bit, in regards to that, so I can certainly find out for you, that's no problem.
clive.martin: Okay.
clive.martin: So, so, so… I think maybe what, …
clive.martin: unless you say otherwise, I think it'd be useful to see whether you need any more money income starting from next year, in terms of a tax point of view, if you're going to get some money back from your
clive.martin: son and so forth. But, we can change… we can change the income at any point, as you know. So, you know, if you think you need some more, then that's… that's a…
clive.martin: That's a… that's a separate issue, but….
George Williams: a separate issue. It's not at the moment. My, yeah, my current account is going down slowly, and I'm… I tend not to use it now for, oh, you know what, we'll book that holiday for a couple of grand and go away, and I just use it out of my current account. I don't take it out of my current account, I take it out of my savings accounts, you know, wherever I've got that money, and it's just easy to do that I've got.
clive.martin: No, no, no, I get it, I get it. I mean, look, I think, I think the, the, the challenge… oh, one thing. What would you say the value of the property's worth now?
George Williams: I would say about a million.
clive.martin: Okay.
George Williams: around a million, Clyde, something like that. And that's the other problem, you know, yeah, yeah, it is.
clive.martin: So, so, look, … If we take the inheritance tax scenario.
clive.martin: just where we are today. You…
clive.martin: 2.8 or 2.6? I can't… I can't read my own writing in terms of your… what the total amount you've got with us.
George Williams: … So, if I…
George Williams: My total investments, you're right, well, if we take everything from the investments that I've got, like, everywhere.
George Williams: That's my cash, and also the cash that you have. That's about $2.7 million. The house is worth a million, and that gives me a total worth at the moment, I reckon, of $3.7 million.
clive.martin: Correct, yep, that's roughly. So you knock off $650,000.
clive.martin: Because that's your new rate band.
George Williams: Roy.
clive.martin: You understand what Neil White Bond is?
George Williams: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
clive.martin: Okay, so times that by 40%. So at the moment, you're looking at a 1.2 million pound bill.
George Williams: Yeah, I know.
George Williams: Jesus.
clive.martin: So… Don't, don't panic, Mr Mallon.
George Williams: I'm panicked!
clive.martin: So I think, I think there are… there are…
clive.martin: There are 3 things I'm getting clients to think about.
clive.martin: Well, let's go back and stage.
clive.martin: what is your view about that? Is it A,
clive.martin: I don't give a monkeys that someone else's problems.
clive.martin: B, … I am worried about that, but I'm also worried about my own expenditure.
clive.martin: Or C, no, I want to make sure that the government gets as little money as possible.
George Williams: I think I tend to go on C, really. That's… you know, I don't want the government to get my money, but there again, you know…
George Williams: We haven't got a massive…
George Williams: expenditure wish list, or whatever. That hasn't changed. So, yes, I want to spend more on the money that I've got now.
George Williams: I'd like to get it to my children now, if I could.
George Williams: In some method, to make sure we have enough money. So, the things that I always think, I'm going to get to a stage
George Williams: Maybe, maybe not, I don't know. Let's say…
George Williams: in another 15 years' time, or wherever 20 years' time, where I'm going, well, Mum and Dad, you've got to go into a home.
George Williams: You know, the cost of that is, I've always said, the million pounds in the house will cover that, I would think. I would hope it would, because the average life
George Williams: span of someone going into a home, I know, is… is less than 4 years. It is. So, you know, I've calculated that out and got, well, that… that will cover us for a home for that period. So the money. So that then leaves about, you know, two… two… two…
George Williams: 2.7 million to get rid of, somehow.
George Williams: Without the taxman getting hold of it.
George Williams: Per se. Now, it might be that I pop my clogs next year, and Alison does as well, or whatever.
clive.martin: … Cool.
George Williams: You don't know, you can't….
clive.martin: you need a crystal ball, and I'm not sure if anyone's got any one of those.
George Williams: But I would like to… if there was a way of being able to say, actually, I could do… you know, you read about these trusts or stuff, and then you're the people that are being caught by them, or whatever, or leaving your house in a deed for someone else, and the children get caught with a tax implication, as we did with Alison's mothers.
George Williams: et cetera, et cetera. Well, I'd like to find… I know that I can give the money to the kids at the moment, and I do, and point of fact, I give more than, I think, seven grand or whatever it is at the moment to them.
George Williams: But my view is they're such small amounts that, you know, no one declares it, and I don't think anyone can find out, really, unless the taxman comes along and says, oh, let's have a look at his account.
clive.martin: Well, my ears are slightly shutting at those comments, but, so….
George Williams: I know.
clive.martin: Let's be black and white, but the, …
clive.martin: a pet is basically you should live 7 years, so you live 7 years in regards to that. And if… if in the event that, on your death, that the HMRC are worried about it, they can go back into your situation, and then they can… they can dig everything up. Yeah. So, …
clive.martin: I will perhaps send you a form that you can look at if you want to record this on a regular basis, because I'll show you.
clive.martin: If you've got income versus expenditure rules, where you've got more income than expenditure, you can gift that money out on a monthly basis, or over the year, and that is automatically outside your estate. But you need to record it, because if someone comes back in and says.
clive.martin: You know.
clive.martin: what the hell was that? Then you need to prove it, otherwise it'll go back into the estate, and you might get, you know.
clive.martin: But also from the point of view, if you don't live the 7 years. So, one should be, right now, more…
clive.martin: Than ever, to be clear, because they'll have the ability to check the accounts.
clive.martin: So, that's one. I think one of the, … There's some simple stuff.
clive.martin: that I think people should consider.
clive.martin: But before, before I do that, what do you think your general expenditure is, then? If you're being conservative and say, well, I want to have a certain amount of income to enjoy, what do you reckon the number is, in terms of your point of view?
George Williams: I don't know, actually, to be honest.
clive.martin: What would you say you're spending now? You said Alison's spending about 1500 quid a month.
clive.martin: And you're spending about, ….
George Williams: Yeah, I mean….
clive.martin: Well, you must be spending roughly about 50, aren't you?
George Williams: Yes.
George Williams: I was gonna say 50. I would think, between us.
George Williams: We've got an annual expenditure of between…
George Williams: Yeah, 60 to 70, I would think, with the other bits and pieces. But then, on top of that, you know, we draw down maybe 10, 15K for holidays or other bits and pieces like that, new, whatever.
clive.martin: No, no, so, so, so, …
clive.martin: I was ver… so, I would… I would think that, basically, you should probably be thinking about $85,000 a year, which is $70,000, what I call day-to-day expenditures, and gives you 15 grand for a float for holidays and stuff like that.
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: Yeah. Does that seem fair?
clive.martin: So then… and then you get into the sort of more brutal camp thought process. Well, how long am I going to live for?
George Williams: Right? I know.
clive.martin: And if you take the normal average, so you might, you might, as one client said to me, I'm way above average, I'm going to live way, way beyond the average. I said, fine, then you should plan on that basis, but as a starting point. So, …
clive.martin: Married men are 86, and married women are 89 at the moment, roughly, according to the statistics.
George Williams: Really?
clive.martin: Yeah, as a… as a… as a number. It's only an average, so, you know, obviously some people, you know, we've got the woman who's living, who's 116 today, so, you know, there's quite a… quite a wide scope.
clive.martin: But clearly, part of that is that data includes COVID, and obviously a lot of people died in COVID.
clive.martin: So, you know, so that has an impact, but… So, if you took
clive.martin: whatever figure we worked on. So if we said 85,000, and then we… and then we multiplied,
clive.martin: You're… 72?
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: Okay, so if we took… if we took, …
clive.martin: Sorry, 85,000. And we took 20 years, that takes you to 92.
clive.martin: So that gives you a bit more on the upside.
clive.martin: … So you need £1.7 million worth of assets.
clive.martin: A big cup.
George Williams: about it.
clive.martin: Over that 20 years.
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: Now… …
clive.martin: This is why you need to have a sort of chew over in your own mind, you think whether this sort of makes sense. So, 85,000, …
clive.martin: … Divided by 2 sixths.
clive.martin: So if you took $85,000 out, that's about 3.2% of your pot.
clive.martin: Right, okay. So, if you're looking at…
clive.martin: So, we work on a figure that, if you're talking about an income, if you look at a 4% figure.
clive.martin: Has been conservative long-term asset returns of assets, and if we're in a balanced portfolio, we're trying to make 5, so there's another better than 1% buffer in regards to that.
clive.martin: So you're below the 4%, so… As a starting point.
clive.martin: That would mean if you took that $85,000 out.
clive.martin: Each year, and we made 4%.
clive.martin: You'd have all that money still there, plus a bit more.
clive.martin: In 20 years' time.
George Williams: Yeah, I think you always said that when we first started this conversation off some 15, 20 years ago, about how much I'd have left when we, you know, if you carried on taking this amount.
George Williams: And even now, I still look at the pension pot, and I go, it's exactly the same as it was, like.
George Williams: 10 years ago, 1.3 million, or 1.2 million. It's exactly the same.
clive.martin: So, so…
clive.martin: What that basically says is there's probably a bit of… there's a bit of, freedom in terms of stuff that even if you… as you know.
clive.martin: you spend more money in the first 10, 10, 15 years, it then flattens out, and then it starts coming down. So the reality is, if you're building a buffer, you're probably not going to be spending that in 5-10 years' time.
George Williams: Yeah, yeah.
clive.martin: … And don't forget, obviously, you review each year anyway, so, but on the basis of that.
clive.martin: And you've already got to… so…
clive.martin: You've still got, in our view, 900,000 above the level you think you probably need.
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: But…
clive.martin: That's just the start… this is what… this is what I mean about… this is just a starting figure.
clive.martin: Now, the question is, is that still there?
clive.martin: Paying $1.2 million.
clive.martin: Of the whole thing.
clive.martin: So if you did nothing, and it carried on growing in another 20 years.
clive.martin: The likelihood is that that bill's likely to go up slightly over time.
clive.martin: Because your other assets will have gone up as well, so, …
clive.martin: The bill's likely to get bigger.
clive.martin: So, I would say to clients.
clive.martin: if you're comfortable with your number being good, and, you know, $85,000 as a starting point, I think is a reasonable go at it.
clive.martin: That's not say you can't change your mind at any point, by the way, you're not locked into the 20 years, you can only take 85 grand back, and that would be silly.
clive.martin: … is… what can I do that actually will make it?
clive.martin: sensible that I don't end up with a huge, great bill.
George Williams: Yes.
clive.martin: Now, there's no silver bullet.
clive.martin: There's a lot of… there's lots of things you can do that all add up.
clive.martin: If that makes sense.
George Williams: Okay, yes, it does, yeah.
clive.martin: Now, remind me, how many grandchildren do you have?
George Williams: Five.
clive.martin: Alright, there you go.
clive.martin: Football, football 5 aside, too.
clive.martin: … Okay.
clive.martin: So, … We've talked about, we've talked about toothing,
clive.martin: You can gift money outside your estate and live 7 years, and you know how you just write the check and boff, there you go.
George Williams: Is that… that's to each grandchildren, or e….
clive.martin: Each child? Any person you like, doesn't have to be a grandchild. You can give your money whoever you want. Whoever you give it to, you've just got to last 7 years.
clive.martin: And then it's outside your state.
George Williams: Right. So, how much are you allowed to give without
George Williams: it being taxed, or… or notifying anyone, or….
clive.martin: There are small amounts that you can… you can do, and I can… I can… but in reality, it's, you know, it's like 3 grand in total a year you can start giving out as a… as a gift with no taxation. But if you want to… if you want to reduce it properly… Yes.
clive.martin: You'll have to think about the 7-year rule at the moment.
George Williams: Right. Okay.
clive.martin: That's… that's… that's… So, I just want to sort of run through a couple of things that you can think about.
clive.martin: … So we've spoken about
clive.martin: writing gifts straight away, income versus expenditure. The third one is actually, buying some life cover.
George Williams: Okay.
clive.martin: Now, so you've probably never thought about this, but a whole-of-life plan, which basically can pay out on the second death.
clive.martin: We'll pay part of the bill,
clive.martin: Or also, is if you do some planning, if you've got another 20 years to go, then you're… if you do some planning, that gives us plenty of time to reduce the estate.
clive.martin: If that makes sense.
George Williams: Yes.
clive.martin: So…
clive.martin: what I would… what I would… the way I work… the way I weigh and work this out…
clive.martin: Is, broadly speaking, between 10 or 20% of what your figure is today is the amount that you should probably insure yourself for if you want to go down to the life cover route.
clive.martin: So that's probably about £200,000, is 200, 250,000 life cover. Now, …
clive.martin: What that means, in simple terms, is that you know that in the event there's a second death, it will be paid out to your beneficiaries.
clive.martin: And those beneficiaries can be your children or their grandchildren, depending on
clive.martin: how you want to do that. But you know that they will have a certain amount of money that they can then either use that money for themselves, or to pay some of the bill if there isn't, you know, it could take a while to pay that bill.
clive.martin: So, so, … And you can stop that at any time if you want to.
clive.martin: So if you've got rid of all your estate and everything's there, you don't need it anymore, you don't have to pay it any longer.
clive.martin: So… but I do think it's something that most people, should think about as part of the package that I think, in terms of planning, it works.
George Williams: Okay.
clive.martin: Now…
clive.martin: The next one, you talked about trust, and you had that sort of skeptical look about, or trust the bloody complicated, they've all gone horribly wrong. So there are, there are, … have you heard or ever thought about a thing called a discretionary trust?
George Williams: No, I'm not… I've not really looked into trusts at all, to be honest. I've just heard some horrible things that's happened with trusts, that's all. Okay. Because the law changes quite rapidly, and all of a sudden, you know, you get caught by this trust or that trust, and saying, well, no, we can't pay that out.
George Williams: Or, in terms of what Alison had with, you know, the interest on the house that her mother and father had left them in trust, okay? We were paying something like 55% tax on the interest that it had gained, which was shedloads of money at the end of the day.
clive.martin: Yeah, property is a completely separate issue, and I… and I, you know, my own… my own view on that, I don't think you can do anything really, I think, proper and sensible, boring financial planning on housing. I think that's a bit tricky, but…
clive.martin: …
clive.martin: The nil rate band, your 325,000 nil rate band, which you can use in the event of death to offset some of the, bill, you could set up a discretionary trust using a nil rate band today.
clive.martin: So you place $325,000 in a discretionary trust. A discretionary trust is what it means, is that you and Alison will be the trustees.
clive.martin: And you are the only people who can decide where that money goes.
George Williams: Right, okay.
clive.martin: Now, the reason why I think that might be more appropriate for you is because you've got a classic family situation, which, only you will be able to have a better judgment on, and you've already said one thing, you said, well, I can't afford to…
clive.martin: help them out on the school fees for that one, and then, because I won't be able to help. So the issue is, you might say, well, at the end of the day, I want to give
clive.martin: A number to each grandchild, or
clive.martin: or family, so that it's equal. What they then do with that money is completely up to them.
George Williams: Right, okay.
clive.martin: Does that make sense?
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: But you decide where it is.
clive.martin: And if… and if one of them said, I want to come… can I… can I have 30 grand from the trust dad to buy a Porsche, you can say no.
clive.martin: If you can say someone like, you know, he's going on a rugby tour to Canada, and you go, how much it is, can I come with you?
clive.martin: one of those. So, …
clive.martin: Now, that $325,000, if it lasts for 7 years, you last for 7 years, so that's… that's sec… that's, … if you did that, then that is completely outside your estate.
George Williams: Okay. So you say 325 times times 40%.
George Williams: Is that making in that trust, is that making money at the same time?
clive.martin: George, I could almost… That was the next question I thought you might ask me.
clive.martin: If you invest in the same portfolio that you've been in for a long period of time, so you can do the same thing, so the trust can grow as well.
clive.martin: So, if… if basically, over the… over a 7-year period, and I'm… I'm using this for simple math, if it doubles and turns into 650,
clive.martin: The trust is then worth $650, and you can… that can all go to…
clive.martin: And that's also outside of your estate.
George Williams: Right, and in terms of drawing it out, you can decide, I can decide, or if it's obviously Alison and I can decide.
George Williams: Where it can go to, and what it could be spent on.
clive.martin: Who it goes to, how much, and what they're doing it.
George Williams: Okay.
George Williams: Well, that makes… that makes sense, yeah. Is there a catch?
clive.martin: Well, there's… look, I've told you, there's no perfect world. Yeah. Let me talk about the sort of things that you need to consider.
clive.martin: … After 10 years.
clive.martin: So the trust is still going after 10 years. The profit from the money that you've invested
clive.martin: So, anything that's grown above the 325 is taxed at 6%.
George Williams: At how much?
clive.martin: 6%.
George Williams: 6.
clive.martin: Fix.
clive.martin: Okay.
George Williams: Okay.
clive.martin: And that money can then be taken out of that trust and paid out, within that.
clive.martin: So it's… compared to 40% to 6%, it's a pretty good deal.
George Williams: Yes, very good deal.
clive.martin: So, but there… but there is… but there is that… there is that taxation issue. Now…
clive.martin: This is where it gets really, really complicated. If after 7 years, you've lived 7 years.
clive.martin: Then you can actually, anyone believes this, set up another one.
clive.martin: And using the white band again.
George Williams: Right.
George Williams: But once that… once that money's in that trust, that's it. You could…
George Williams: You can't take it out and reinvest it with you, because it's in a trust fund for….
clive.martin: You know, so the trust is just a document, and we would carry on looking after the investment of the…
clive.martin: Okay? That money is not legally yours.
George Williams: Oh, I don't like that. No, go on. Yeah, but it's not….
clive.martin: But, thoughts, but, but, but…
clive.martin: So, if, what a lot of people… if, let's say, we did all this lovely little homework, and we said, you need $85,000, by the end of it, it's suddenly, oh, shit, I need a lot more.
clive.martin: … Discretionary trusts can pay the beneficiaries, which could be your children, or your grandchildren.
clive.martin: And they could then pay
clive.martin: If you have to go into a home, for example, and there was… there was more money required, because it then is their money, and if they wanted to pay their… your bill for… they could do that.
clive.martin: … If you wanted to take them all on holiday.
clive.martin: And the trust did quite well, you could pay them the money, and then the trust… the beneficiaries could then pay the whole debt with the trust money.
clive.martin: So you are still paying for it, but it's just been around, and you've capped off that growth of it, and it's carried on growing.
clive.martin: The only issue is, I've got enough money in my mind that I'm… I'm gonna be okay, Governor.
clive.martin: I've still got my $85,000 for 20 years, that's… I've worked out 1.7, so I've still got
clive.martin: I've still got some money left over.
George Williams: So, just one question, Clive. Could we take that, let's say, $150 from Al, 150 from myself, or whatever it is, and shove in there?
clive.martin: Yeah, you could. It doesn't matter where the money comes from, but in reality.
clive.martin: The reason why, the maximum you can do is a nil rate band.
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: If you could afford a nilrate band, it's the 325 where the money comes from, doesn't matter.
George Williams: Okay. Alright.
clive.martin: … And then, obviously, if you keep reviewing each year, depending on how the funds are doing.
clive.martin: You know, so if the funds were growing more on the rest of your stuff within Solstice, i.e. the thing was catching back up again, even though… then you can always, you know.
clive.martin: Gift that a bit more.
clive.martin: So you'll keep reviewing it each year, but you start off with
clive.martin: You buy some life cover, that gives you something like $200,000, $250,000. Then you've got $325,000, so that's $500,000.
clive.martin: Just on those two things.
George Williams: So, on the… going back to the life cover, how much does that cost?
clive.martin: Well, that would depend on, on, two factors. Your age and your health.
clive.martin: And obviously, what we do is simply… I can easily do it, I'm doing it… I'm doing it every day at the moment.
clive.martin: Okay. Get you a quote for a number, and then you can see whether you think, oh, that's far too expensive, or that seems really reasonable, whatever.
clive.martin: But I think… As a combination, you add those, just doing those two things, That's almost halving the bill.
George Williams: Yeah.
George Williams: No, I say that.
clive.martin: So, 3 to 5… You're… you are losing it, but you're… you're still in control of it.
George Williams: You can still spend it.
clive.martin: The trust can still spend it, but obviously it's the beneficiaries who have to spend it.
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: So, it'll be… it's completely up to you who they are.
clive.martin: So, that's….
George Williams: Yeah, so my beneficiaries could well be…
George Williams: Yeah, my son, my daughter, and my grandchildren.
clive.martin: Well, I mean, I'm going to say the obvious thing, depending on the age of the children and so forth, but,
clive.martin: By skipping two generations.
George Williams: Yeah?
clive.martin: That's proper financial planning.
clive.martin: Because if…
clive.martin: And again, this is where… this is where it becomes important, and this is where you come important in terms of where you choose it.
clive.martin: If you think… Gareth doesn't need the money.
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: But it's useful for the grandchildren. You might want to give the money to the grandchildren.
clive.martin: If your daughter, however, needs the money for her.
clive.martin: Helping out with the kids, you might want to give it to her.
clive.martin: That's the whole point of a discretionary, and only you will know how that… how that fits.
George Williams: Right, so we can put them in there for it, but do you have to decide when you do this discretionary trust?
George Williams: that they all get the equal amounts, or can it be, again, discretionary about, actually, I want to give them that amount, and her that amount?
George Williams: That's why it's called a discretionary trust. That's what… that's why… sorry, I was just wanting qualification on that, yeah.
clive.martin: And that's why, in your particular case.
clive.martin: Look, you can do a thing called a bear trust, which is simply, I'm…
clive.martin: It's 50 grand for one of my grandchildren, but it… once it's absolutely… it can't change.
clive.martin: I don't think you want that, and should need that. I think you should want to have that full discretionary in regards to that process.
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: But you can't get to that point, should I do it, until you're happy with
clive.martin: The first thought process is, well.
clive.martin: if 85 grand… if 85 grand's a starting point, and I multiply that by 20, and I've still got my 1.7 million.
clive.martin: Why do I need this extra bits?
George Williams: Okay.
clive.martin: Now, so, …
clive.martin: And there are other stuff that you can look at, which is… which is, …
clive.martin: More risky in the sense of investment stuff, but you can do business relief.
clive.martin: Up to a million quid a year, which, if you invest in it, and you last two years, it's 100% outside your estate.
clive.martin: But that's more for people who
clive.martin: Perhaps got maybe a bit more, or are slightly older, who've only got a short period of time to live, and that's the only way around getting the money out of the estate.
clive.martin: I think, if you did those two things, and you did some income and expenditure and some potential gifts outright.
clive.martin: … You know, just on those two, two things at $250 and a 3, you've halved the bill.
clive.martin: Almost half of the bill.
clive.martin: Without… without actually… the only costing is basically… is your slightly excess pain for the life cover.
George Williams: So, just… sorry, I'm just a little bit…
George Williams: reiterate for me how the life cover actually works again. So, I pay a premium.
clive.martin: Yeah, you pay a premium, and let's call it 500 quid a month, let's just come up with a number. So it's 6 grand a year, and you live 20 years, that's what you… you'd have paid out 120 grand in terms of, of premiums.
clive.martin: And it will pay out $250,000 in terms of… on death.
George Williams: Right, okay. Okay. So do you do it for a period of time, or is it once it's set up, that's it?
clive.martin: that's what a whole of life is a whole of life until you… the second die… person dies. So you carry on paying that premium for that… for that length of time. So if you both got killed in a car crash the second month.
clive.martin: You'll have paid one premium, and $250,000 would be paid.
George Williams: But if I live for another 20 years.
clive.martin: For 20 years, we've paid out £120,000 in premiums, but you're still getting £250,000 on debt.
clive.martin: So your break-even point, you'd have to live probably 40 years.
George Williams: Okay, I'm with it, I'm with it, with it. Yeah, I… I… I understand.
clive.martin: And the reason why you look at both.
clive.martin: as a combination, why I think it's useful.
clive.martin: It's because you don't know how long you're gonna live for.
George Williams: No.
George Williams: Question, is that done on both of our lives, or is that done on….
clive.martin: No, it's done both of your lives.
George Williams: So what… and when does that… So if, if let's say….
clive.martin: I died first. Yep.
George Williams: Does… does that mature at that point, or…?
clive.martin: No, no, so it only pays out on the second death, so you keep paying the premiums on the second death.
George Williams: So, so… Would the premium then reduce, or not? No, it would still be the same? No. Okay, alright, that just… yeah, fine. No, I understand.
George Williams: Okay.
clive.martin: But… but ultimately, You've got two simple decisions to make that are complicated to agree on.
clive.martin: Is $85,000 is a good starting point for the next 20 years, and you have all that money, …
clive.martin: We know the mass is 1.7 million.
clive.martin: So, if that figure is good in your mind, then you know you're going to have some surplus.
clive.martin: So, all I… all I'm saying is, on that basis, if we just start with this, you've got 900 surplus. If you took 325 out, and you do some life covers on the side, you've still got about 600,000 left.
clive.martin: And you then got 20 years, to… decrease the, the bill.
clive.martin: In simple terms, I mean, you'll spend a bit more money.
clive.martin: Or gifted out, depending on how you want to do it.
George Williams: Right, okay.
clive.martin: Yeah.
George Williams: Fine. So you said 5 points. I think that was 4.
clive.martin: Okay, so, so, we talked about the business tax relief, the one you can do for 2 years. Yeah. You can go up to a million quid, so that's, that's another option. And then you've got AIM,
clive.martin: the AIM Index.
clive.martin: Right. Which is… which is basically smaller, smaller companies, and you invest in that, and after 2 years, you've got a 50% relief.
clive.martin: So you put 100 grand in, 50 grand is automatic outside your estate after 2 years.
George Williams: Right, okay.
clive.martin: And the last thing is, that most people don't do.
clive.martin: Is basically you can trade down on your house, and then gift some money away.
clive.martin: So if you're saying your house is worth a million quid.
George Williams: Yep.
clive.martin: I said to you, George, will you ever leave your home?
clive.martin: And most people go, no, I won't.
George Williams: No.
clive.martin: I'm really happy where I am, blah blah blah, all that stuff.
clive.martin: And I say to you, well, is there… is there somewhere, as you get older, … And again…
clive.martin: Do you want to live on that hill?
clive.martin: Don't… don't… don't you want a flat.
clive.martin: A flat place as you get older.
clive.martin: Question mark.
George Williams: Yeah, I know, I understand, yeah.
clive.martin: And then the issue on that is, is that going to release some capital, which will then give you more money to either spend or
clive.martin: Protect yourself, or gift.
clive.martin: Because it's the property, it's the most illiquid thing.
George Williams: Yeah.
George Williams: No, booked you with that.
clive.martin: So I've, you know, I've got a client who I saw last week. He's got 11… 11 properties.
clive.martin: All in Tunbridge Wells.
clive.martin: worth about $3.4 million. And I said to him.
clive.martin: iPads sell them. And he said, no. I said, why?
clive.martin: He said, because I've lived… I live in the town, I've known all the people in there, I don't want to walk down the street and be told that I'm turfing people out.
clive.martin: So I said, you're happy to have a £2.9 million pound bill.
clive.martin: Three children.
clive.martin: Explain.
George Williams: Wow, yeah.
clive.martin: So, so, so people, you know… Yeah. And sadly, his wife died about 6 months ago, so he's… he's obviously in a, in a, you know, difficult thing. But…
clive.martin: So you do have to… Want not to pay the bill.
George Williams: I know the money.
clive.martin: And at the moment, A lot of people say they don't want to pay the bill, but the bill
clive.martin: April to June this year, the increase in, in IHT bill is $1.9 billion.
clive.martin: In the UK.
clive.martin: So, clearly, most people don't understand it, don't really want to go through with it, and then put their head in the sand, because they get to a certain age and they go, oh, I don't care.
clive.martin: And then the children of those people find it difficult to go, oh, bloody hell.
clive.martin: We need to sort them out.
clive.martin: So the daughter sent me to this 78-year-old guy last week, saying, can you try and help? Because, you know.
clive.martin: He doesn't quite know what to do now. So… …
clive.martin: You've got time, but, if you don't think about these things, and you don't put some plan in action, or are happy
clive.martin: with doing nothing.
clive.martin: Then you are always going to be a bill.
clive.martin: And it's just a question of how big… how big it is. Now, not the sexiest of topics, not the greatest thing.
George Williams: No, but it's… it's something that, yeah, something that you can't… you… we've now both, you know, you have to address, you have to address it, yeah.
clive.martin: So, and the other thing that, just to clarify,
clive.martin: nobody really thinks that the, this Labour government is going to put taxes down.
clive.martin: They'd like to put more taxes up.
clive.martin: And down a massive time.
clive.martin: … So, if… if people are interested in the… in the trust thing.
clive.martin: Then it really needs to be done before the budget.
clive.martin: Because if they think….
George Williams: You think it will change in the budget?
clive.martin: Well, the issue is, as I always say to people.
clive.martin: If they don't change it, are you worse off if you put it into placement and you want to do it anyway?
clive.martin: You're not. If, however, you do it, and they do change it, then you are better off.
clive.martin: So, the way I think about it is, try and explain it as quickly as possible, and then if someone wants to go ahead.
clive.martin: just make sure we… we get there first before the budget, and the budget's by end of October, so that sort of thing.
clive.martin: And it takes a while to sort out the trust, so…
clive.martin: That's something to bear in mind.
clive.martin: And that's why, sort of, I'm flagging it up to all clients, in regards to it. But, …
clive.martin: It's unlikely, you know, they might move it from 7 to 10 years and stuff like that, but we don't think there's going to be wholesale changes, but there might be.
George Williams: There might be. Okay. It's a risk, you know, you either take or you don't take. Just one other question for you, Clive.
clive.martin: Sorry, but could I just finish one last thing?
George Williams: Oh, sorry, carry on, yeah.
clive.martin: If you give a pet, and you give them money to your children.
clive.martin: and you lived it 7 years, obviously that's outside. The trust you have with your children is pretty good. So the reality is, if they stuck it in a bank, or they stuck it in an investment.
clive.martin: over that 7-year period, then… and they can still access it within that period of time, and that's another way of doing it.
George Williams: Right, yeah, Annie.
George Williams: Okay.
clive.martin: So, so… as I call it, a potpourri of loads of different ways of getting to the same issue.
clive.martin: you've just got to decide what you might feel more comfortable with, and what you think is the best solution for you and your family and Benjo.
George Williams: Yeah, I'm with you.
George Williams: Yeah, no, you've given me a lot of thought process to think on there, which… this is what I needed now, because we do need to look at this. I think I'm at an age now where, as you said, you live for 20 more years, which I hope I do, but…
George Williams: there's options there to reduce that bill dramatically. One other question, I was talking to, well, one of your… Chris Merit, who… whatever.
George Williams: What he said he's done, Is he is… he's actually set up pensions.
George Williams: For each one of his grandchu- his…
George Williams: I think nieces, or nephews, or whoever it is.
clive.martin: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
George Williams: Is that a tax… Way of doing it, or not?
clive.martin: Yeah, well, look… If you're… if you're… you could pay a pension contribution for your grandchildren.
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: They can do $3,600, you get 20% relief on the contribution, so any cost $2,880.
clive.martin: Yeah. That's considered a pet, so you live 7 years, it goes outside the estate, but they then have a pension at an early age, and basically they can't… don't forget, they can't get at it until
clive.martin: Yes. 58, as it were, so if you think you want to have a real long-term planning scenario.
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: You can do that.
clive.martin: And you can also do a junior ISA, which is 9 grand.
clive.martin: So, if you wanted to have a little, you know, as some grandparents do, and they go, right, how many grandchildren I got? I'm going to give 10 grand to each grandchild. They go, right, I'll…
clive.martin: Some of it goes into the ISA, because then that's flexible, they can… they can touch it when they're past 18, and that puts some money into a pension. That sorts that whole thing out, and then that's outside the estate, and you know, you know, basically, that's a good thing for them.
clive.martin: And they can't touch it for a period of time.
George Williams: Yeah.
George Williams: Yeah, no, that's what… and Chris was saying that he had… he had given some money to them, his sister's children, who he's godparents to, and he said, you know, when they got to 18, he said they just spent it all overnight.
George Williams: Literally, within whatever. So, the only way he was going to give them more money is actually by, you know, giving them a pension, so at least when they got the pension age, they'd have something to live on.
clive.martin: I think… I think one of the issues And…
clive.martin: I don't want to sound as if I'm on my moral soapbox.
clive.martin: But… People like yourself think very carefully about what you're trying to do.
clive.martin: What the… the… actually, the effect it's gonna have on… on… on people.
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: Clan said to me last week, which made me laugh, because I hadn't heard the expression, I don't want my grandchildren to be trustafarians.
clive.martin: And I'm like, I've never heard that.
clive.martin: 80s thing, that is. You know, so they're so wealthy that basically, but…
clive.martin: I think the secret is, if money is given to them, given to them in this sort of style.
clive.martin: That it's the job of not only the giver.
clive.martin: But also, the dad, because the dads like to be there longer, to educate them that this is… this is… this is a present from…
clive.martin: Grandparents to make their lives in the long run better.
clive.martin: I mean, I always remember my grandmother, gave…
clive.martin: 1,000 pounds, 500 quid, and they… they bought a house on the back garden.
clive.martin: which they played in to live about 8 or 9 years. They looked after that place like a… like nothing else. They cleaned it every single time, and it's because
clive.martin: Granny… granny gave to us. Their own rooms were bloody picked, even their parents kept on telling, so it's a completely different story. But emotionally.
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: They had a better connection.
clive.martin: And if you basically… this is, this is, you know, this money is to be spent, you know, your grandparents wanted to give you your first… help with your first car, or some education, or deposit to help with your first house.
clive.martin: Then it becomes a whole different scenario, and the earlier that you bring them into that educational process, the better it is.
George Williams: Mmm.
clive.martin: But most people don't do that, and…
clive.martin: They get to a point, and they just go, oh, fantastic, so I've got free money, no one's ever talked to me about it. Well, on that basis, I'm just gonna… you know… What were we like at 18? Well, we'll spend it. Oh, can I go to Canada Rugby Tour? I'm going, see ya, bye!
George Williams: Yeah, you're right. And that's what I thought about that as well, and I thought, long-term pension, that's a long way to go, and whatever. I mean, if you could do something which is, you know, and as you said, educate, you have to educate both, both the grandchild and the parent, in terms of, this is what it's for, it's not to be spent on tattoos, and as Chris said, going out.
George Williams: binging every, you know, Saturday night, which, apparently, that's what happened with a lot of the money that he gave them.
George Williams: And he just went, you know, that's not what I gave the money for, and it's.
clive.martin: No, and I think, I think, I think it's, it's…
clive.martin: It makes it worse, because then the people… then you feel you've done the wrong thing, even though you have the right intentions.
George Williams: Yes, yeah, it's an intention I want to make sure works, and not whatever. I think our grandchildren, from what I know of them at the moment, I don't know what they'll be like when they're 18, so you can never tell, but I would hope they've got… they're sensible enough, and I know my… I know my daughter and my…
George Williams: son so well that they would put a hold on it. But you can only, you know, you can only hold up… if it's in their name and they've got it, that's it, you know. So hopefully they will.
clive.martin: But that's… and I… and I understand that, and that's why…
clive.martin: Again, why a lot of people, they do a bit of…
clive.martin: bit of both, because they don't know, but the discretionary trust has that power to… you're still in that power bit. Yeah. And if they don't know… That's the money.
George Williams: Please, Granddad!
clive.martin: Well, I think you have a much better feel for the development of the child.
clive.martin: What's important to them, and why they want to do it.
George Williams: Yeah, I agree.
clive.martin: And then you can, you can tie that in, you know, from that point of view.
clive.martin: I mean, it's interesting, one of the, …
clive.martin: One of the, parents who'd done it quite a long time ago.
clive.martin: said to me, God, you know, my son said to me, that I'd love to go and do an MBA, it's gonna cost a lot of money. Would… would the trust help me out a bit?
clive.martin: And he said, you really want to do that?
clive.martin: And he was like, he was so happy that the trust was going to help him with his… …
clive.martin: And his son was saying, well, I don't think I can go, because I can't afford it.
clive.martin: And that was exactly what it was there for, but….
George Williams: Yeah, 100%.
clive.martin: He had no idea that was going to be the situation. So, that's the thing about life, you don't know what you don't know.
clive.martin: You don't know. But when you can combine that in the right areas, you can make a real big difference.
George Williams: Yeah.
clive.martin: And that's… that's why I think, …
clive.martin: It's a nice… it's a nice halfway house to do it.
George Williams: It is. I like that discussion, Ritas, and the life cover. I'm not so keen on that, but I can see the benefit of that, and absolutely, as you say, you get the money back.
George Williams: easily over 50%, plus. Okay.
clive.martin: Is that, is that… I mean….
George Williams: I think that is a lot of.
clive.martin: If we've burdened you with a whole lot of stuff today.
George Williams: No, no, I mean, I won't….
clive.martin: I wanted to go through it, because I think….
George Williams: Yes.
clive.martin: Time to chew it over, and have a thought.
clive.martin: ….
George Williams: It is something that we're really thinking about now, Clive, and I think those type of things, we need to start putting into place. I think financially, I'm okay, because we're not massive, great big spenders. I'm not going to go out and buy a Porsche tomorrow, as you know, you've known me too long now, you know. Yeah, we want to take some more holidays.
George Williams: And yeah, I might be spending another extra 10, or maybe even 20 grand a year on some holidays, but that certainly is not going to break the bank or really affect what we're doing here, I don't think, in any way.
clive.martin: But even… even… even if… even if you thought, I'm not going to do 85, I'm gonna do 100 grand, another 15 grand… Yeah. That's only 2 million, that's still 700,000 short. So, I mean, it's like, there's… there's…
clive.martin: I think we've got to a point now that you can do whatever you want.
George Williams: Yeah, no.
clive.martin: Which is nice, nice, but we weren't expecting to have
clive.martin: to worry about an IHT scenario as much as we are today. But hang-ho, that's…
clive.martin: That's the way the….
George Williams: Yeah, you know, you always thought the whole SIP thing was brilliant, because you go, yeah, pass this on down, it's all tax-free, thank you very much.
George Williams: But, yeah. Anyway, it is what it is. So, you can't cry over spilt milk, as they say, but, ….
clive.martin: Officer, is that?
clive.martin: I should have mentioned.
clive.martin: Are you active on 2 minutes, just not 2 minutes?
George Williams: Yeah, no, I've got to go shortly, because I've got a meeting at 6.15, yeah.
clive.martin: 2027 is when the… allegedly, the SIP will come into the… into your estate.
George Williams: Right.
clive.martin: Now, they just had 6 months of consultation, and you can't tax a trust on death.
clive.martin: So, if they want to change… if they change this rule, they're gonna have to change the rules, they're gonna have to do an Act of Parliament.
clive.martin: So there's discussion now about pushing it out to 2028.
clive.martin: If you do… if you push it out to 2028, the next election is 2029. If you did that and dragged everyone into an IHT bill, liability, in 2028,
clive.martin: What are the chances of being elected in 2029?
George Williams: Yeah, none.
clive.martin: So… so…
clive.martin: Look, you don't… we think that it's not the most sensible thing, they haven't really understood it well enough to see the impact.
clive.martin: … And I think they'll be pushing that out, and it won't… won't…
clive.martin: No. But it's always possible it could come in, and therefore, if it does come in, that just makes it worse.
clive.martin: So, you know, but I just thought.
George Williams: white.
clive.martin: I'll give you the update in terms of that. So, are you going to a committee meeting or something, or are you just going to have a few beers down the road?
George Williams: No, no, I've got an update on some commercial… I'm, you know, I'm the commercial manager, so I've got a new sponsorship scheme going on. We lost a couple of our sponsors, unfortunately.
George Williams: This year, again, just financial issues while they can't do it. We've been promoting now 4 years on the trot. We've got a.
clive.martin: Interesting.
George Williams: Yeah, we've got an amazing setup. We're playing in London leagues now, and it… yeah, we've got… everything's clicked at the right time, right? Captain, right players we've attracted. In the local area, you know, we've beaten all the local sides now, so…
George Williams: you know, we're playing some top-quality sides now, and … sponsorship is just something… I mean, I raise about 20 grand a year.
George Williams: But we had 2 pull out, which meant it dropped down to 14, and I'm trying to get
George Williams: More sponsors back in, and you know what, it's so hard to get people to sponsor these type of clubs at the moment, so…
George Williams: I've been making up a whole load of marketing blurb to send out to people to say, yeah, this is what our bronze package, gold package.
George Williams: a platinum package, and this…
George Williams: what, selling players for the year, you know, you buy a player for the year, 200 quid, and you get your name there, da-da-da-da. So, we're trying to sell to everybody, and the best thing is, in-house, we've got lots of mum and dads from minis and juniors that work for companies, work for businesses, and it's starting to pay off, so it's quite good fun, actually.
clive.martin: Well, so who is your… who are you pla… who are the top people in the division you've got now, then?
clive.martin: Well, people like Cobham and those….
George Williams: Yeah, so, yeah, we're playing up.
clive.martin: They really are, you really are, you are really playing.
George Williams: Playing it in the big boys league now!
clive.martin: And then, so is this going into this season, you're going into that league, or…? Yeah.
George Williams: Yeah, yeah, so it will be, it will be, yeah, we're traveling quite a… a way away, so, you know, but yeah, we'll… we'll see. Sometimes you go, hmm…
George Williams: have we reached the level we want to get to? And that's what worries me. We've done this before, not quite as high as this, but we've done it before, when Gareth was playing, actually, and … we hit that level, and we came down like a…
George Williams: stone.
George Williams: I mean, we just fell and kept falling. Because once you start getting beaten.
George Williams: People go, do you know what? I've had enough of this this season, I'm gonna go off and play for so-and-so. They're an up-and-coming club.
clive.martin: Yeah. And all of a sudden, the whole ethos of the club's just… Yeah, yeah. I think changes.
George Williams: And you have to rebuild from grassroots again, so, … Yeah.
clive.martin: Well, best of luck with it.
George Williams: Totally.
clive.martin: Okay, well, look, lovely to speak to you, and we'll speak soon, and ….
George Williams: Yes.
clive.martin: Take it from there.
George Williams: We'll do. Thanks for your time, Clive, appreciate it.
clive.martin: No problems at all. Okay, bye. And you take care.